so the first of the Royal arrivals the
Earl and Countess of Wessex Ella Wessex
Vice patron of the Commonwealth Games
Federation made the closing speech at
the 2018 Commonwealth Games opened the
1990 Commonwealth Games in New Zealand
in the 1998 games in Malaysia and as we
were hearing the Countess of Wessex very
interested in various Commonwealth
causes including ending avoidable
blindness which recently visited Malawi
I was seeing the Queen Elizabeth Diamond
Jubilee Trust
trachoma initiative in Malawi he's
literally just returned actually from a
trip to South Sudan over the weekend
where she marked International Women's
Day and did you say avoidable blindness
very much key part of her work here and
the next car and you can hear I think
see the people lined up to greet the
next royal party to arrive this is His
Highness Duke of Sussex and her Royal
Highness the Duchess of Sussex
[Music]
you chairs the Duchesse sir is wearing a
Amelia Wixted dress and a hat by William
chambers and of course for them this is
the last time they'll be walking into
the happiness this way no surprise we're
seeing that the battery of of newspaper
photographers lights flashing the last
time whether the in Sussex is will
appear in public before standing back as
senior members of the royal family
talking there to the Dean of the Abbey
and smiles as they're brought in to meet
the receiving line the Dean the very
Reverend dr. David Hoyle installed as
the 39th Dean of Westminster in November
2019 they're introduced first of all to
the venerable David Stanton sub-dean and
canon treasurer evidently ball cannon
Stewart and almoner Allen theologian the
Reverend dr. James
hawky
all bauman receiver general in Chapter
Clark
it's grace that you could per clue and
the Prime Minister Boris Johnson it's
Patricia Scotland Secretary General of
the Commonwealth Scotland
it's clear the message has gone out that
there are to be no handshakes further
than Richard Mao Winnie and the right
honorable Lord howl of Guildford chair
of the Council of the Commonwealth
society the Duke and Duchess of
Cambridge arriving
[Music]
it's royal gathering to honor
Commonwealth day this is almost
something from the Queen isn't it I
expect my family to support the
Commonwealth as I have throughout my
life well indeed bear out all members of
the family are raised on on the stories
of the Commonwealth the Queen became
Queen motives at the heart of the
Commonwealth in Kenya they've all the
very first we see that you can touch the
Cambridge their their very first
overseas tutor together was to a
Commonwealth country to Canada and it's
it just forms part of royal life and you
may go on certain tours to different
countries but in between tour around
Europe or on the UK that always be a
calm off tour as well
sometimes it's about grand celebration
sometimes it might be tied in with trade
sometimes it's simply about solidarity
isn't it as we saw in April of last year
when the Duke of Cambridge visited New
Zealand in the aftermath of the
Christchurch mosque shooting very much
as we saw in the film earlier he he went
straight out there after that followed
on from after the the earthquake in
Christchurch in 2011 he went out there
straight after that as well where we see
the Duke and Duchess of Sussex being led
to their seats lassoo to the
Commonwealth country that he enjoys a
particularly close relationship with
having yes founded his charities sent
table with princess of Lesotho to work
with children and young people affected
with HIV in both the suto and Botswana
it's it was one of Prince Harry's first
creations as the charitable creations
was sent to Bali as he say in the SU two
he goes that regularly it's very close
to his heart he's still very active
fundraiser for it and it's it's yet
another example of the way in which the
royal family so many levels are
connected with the Commonwealth and here
of difference of Wales and the Duchess
of Cambridge taking their offense no
offense well visited 45 out of 54
countries of the Commonwealth and we've
already seen a bit of it this afternoon
when you watch those pictures of the
prince on duty in the car
well it does seem to be a sheer a sheer
pleasure in the encounters he has like
his mother it is something he has become
passionate about yes I think he what's
made a wonderful speech in 2013 he
reflected on his life with Commonwealth
leaders and how was a boy he'd grown up
with these Commonwealth leaders coming
to stay how as a student he'd been
waterskiing with the Prime Minister of
Malta and all these these stories
getting back to the early years of his
life look look closely and you can see
the Prince of Wales is declining to
shake hands this afternoon but is is
doing the traditional namaste I wondered
if we might see the the Prime Minister
do a sort of a shoulder shoulder to
people but prince has decided to -
namaste people oh really a handshake
there from the Prime Minister he's
having to hold himself back yes namaste
very good your own to account the fears
of corona virus of course greeting
Baroness Scotland the Commonwealth
secretary-general Lord Harrell of
Guilford chair of the Commonwealth
Society and dr. Linda you there whose
chief executive of the Royal
Commonwealth Society
so we have now the royal family except
Her Majesty the Queen whose car we are
expecting to arrive any moment as soon
as she arrives in front of the Abbey her
arrival will be serenaded by a fanfare
from the state trumpeters at the
household cavalry up in the Abbott's pew
above the Great West door
Duchess of Cambridge making their way
through the choir and towards the high
altar where their seats are their trip
to Pakistan in October this year really
a very important Commonwealth trip a
great sign of a return to some normality
in Pakistan
yes Pakistan over the years twice being
suspended from the Kumar's once actually
withdrew all together back in the 70s
but now very much back at the heart of
things and that visit by the Duke and
Duchess a very significant one very
warmly welcomed by them and now they
take their seats
so we await the arrival of the Queen it
swells over his shoulder to see if he
can see her car arriving the Prince of
Wales undertook her an autumn tour to
India New Zealand and the Solomon
Islands what was his 10th official visit
to India attended a service at the Delhi
War Memorial where he met with gardeners
from the Commonwealth War Graves
Commission who tend to the cemetery and
the Commonwealth War Graves really a
very important part of what the
Commonwealth do maintaining these
graveyards across the continents
immaculately one of the oldest
Commonwealth organisations graves
Commission
I've million men and women from the
country the Commonwealth saw wartime
service during the Second World War six
million soldiers from across the
Commonwealth for what became the
Commonwealth mobilized for World War one
1.1 million British Commonwealth
servicemen killed wherever you see those
Commonwealth graves they are immaculate
perfectly mowed lawns well tended
memorials gravestones kept immaculately
clean shrubs on the graves reflecting
the part of the world where the
graveyards are I've been to several of
the ones where soldiers who fought in
the Burma railway are buried and it is
always a deeply moving experience
wherever you go in the world it is and
it's another reminder of why today
matters it's those shared bonds not just
of language and lore and culture but
also shared sacrifice
and the outriders
here
here is the car bearing Her Majesty the
Queen cheers from the crowds in front of
Westminster Abbey and will stand by for
that fanfare from the state trumpeters
of the household cavalry to mark her
arriving here at this Commonwealth day
of celebration
[Music]
[Applause]
a Majesty the Queen Manik head of state
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland but Queen - in 15
Commonwealth realms queen of Australia
New Zealand Canada Jamaica Antigua and
Barbuda
believes petha new guineas and
Christopher s and Kitts and Nevis and
Vincent on the Grenadines Tuvalu
Barbados Grenada Solomon Solomon Islands
st. Lucia and the Bahamas queen of the
world in some ways Robert certainly
feels like that on a day like today
Petrov the Queen is wearing a Stuart
Parvin coat as described as air force
blue cashmere coat with black and burnt
orange this is an event that she knows
better than anyone she's never missed
one she's attended more of these than
anybody else the Prime Minister bowing
there and Dean taking it down the line
she knows most of these people already
she'll know the hymns she'll know the
the running order she's just saying
hello there's a Lord Hal Guildford
chairman and president Lee roll
Commonwealth Society for her this is a
meeting she's often described the
Commonwealth as her family of Nations
and as she turns to see Prince of Wales
she's with her family she stands now by
the memorial to Winston Churchill as we
prepare for the start of this
Commonwealth Day service
[Music]
for Jacobs arrangement of the national
anthem from the fanfare team from the
band of the Grenadier Guards as the
choristers of Westminster Abbey process
forward to be followed by the Royal
party the opening hymn praise to the
Lord the Almighty the king of creation
[Music]
[Applause]
on behalf of the Dean and chapter I
welcome you warmly to Westminster Abbey
for our annual celebration of the
Commonwealth we gather in this House of
Prayer to celebrate our common life as
God's people and to celebrate as a
Commonwealth of Nations today we look
for the words to express a hope we can
share the common future in which we all
might flourish so we pray for God's
guidance we seek the gifts of an
imagination that can hope abundantly and
a courage to seize that hope confident
in the richness and range of our
Commonwealth we are one people with one
hope under God let us pray in the words
our Savior gave us our Father who art in
heaven hallowed be thy name thy kingdom
come thy will be done on earth as it is
in give us this day our daily bread and
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
those who trespass against us and lead
us not into temptation but deliver us
from evil for thine is the kingdom the
power and the glory forever and ever
amen we go to the great west door for
gun and drummers one drum performing
music from Rwanda in tour a
[Applause]
[Music]
on x2 scientists corner in front of the
memorial to Sir Isaac Newton Alexandra
Burke sings ain't no mountain high
enough
this ain't no mountain in a valley
if you need me come no man
[Music]
you don't have to worry to keep me from
getting there you'll babe remember the
day I set you free
I told you you can always count on me
darling
[Music]
cuz baby
to keep me from getting a you babe
no no no one Telstar can't stop me baby
if you're ever in trouble I'll be there
on the double just send for me my love
is a laugh even when we're apart don't
matter how far we are if you ever need
as fast as I can baby
[Music]
next a reflection for British world
heavyweight boxing champion Anthony
Joshua my name is Anthony Alou fme
eyelash any Joshua and like many of you
here I'm a child of the Commonwealth I
was born in Watford and my heritage is
Nigeria I come from the Yoruba people
who are the largest and some might say
the loudest ethnic group in all of
Africa
I am proudly Nigerian and I'm proudly
British and I drain a long line perhaps
too long to count of UK citizens of
Commonwealth origin who've made enormous
contributions to this great
multicultural society of ours in my
world that would include names such as
Joshua Watts e-learn Sokoli and Ramla
Ali but there are so many more members
of the Commonwealth family including
david adjey one of uk's greatest
architects the MFE dons arguably
britain's brainiest family and of course
the countless nurses teachers and
doctors that made the UK their home
strengthening the very fabric of our
society and our economy we must never
forget either our Commonwealth cousins
who stood shoulder to shoulder in battle
not to mention the amazing impact that
all of these people hailing from the
farthest reaches of the globe have had a
lot culture sense of national identity
my own eyes were open to this amazing
family for the first time when I
traveled to Nigeria as a child whilst I
saw some similarities between our two
countries given our shared heritage as
nations there was a wealth of difference
and a world of exciting possibilities
that realization has stayed with me all
my life like me so many children of the
Commonwealth have two homes two
identities two cultures and two ways of
viewing the
some even have more than two these days
we hear so much about division and
difference that some might be tempted to
see it as a bad thing
or on the contrary it's a beautiful
thing a thing to be celebrated and
cherished and a great source of peace
and stability in this world of extreme
connectivity who better to connect us
and shape our common future than the
children of the Commonwealth who have a
foot in two camps and desperately want
to see both sides succeed there are
times when it's important to talk about
values our personal values and those
that bind us together as a site as a
society and this is one of those times
fairness determination tolerance respect
understanding I like many of those
values in the ring but I apply them to
my everyday life our values define us
and how we conduct ourselves there are
what put their what we put out in the
universe and what we shall receive in
return respect for the dignity of our
Commonwealth cousins
and for all human beings is critical to
bring in our society and communities
together and making them prosperous I
feel opportunity should be there for the
taking along with hard work dedication
and perseverance regardless of one's
background we need to strive harder
collectively in order to create unity it
takes a village to raise a child and in
the same vein it takes a whole community
to act to stand together to tackle some
of the challenges we are confronted with
today with unity and a shared vision we
could help to improve the lives and
prospects of our Commonwealth family and
mutually benefit in the process people
like myself as well as some of the other
stellar names I've already mentioned
will be perfectly placed to assist with
the re-engagement with the Commonwealth
and act as ambassadors for the two
cultures and countries we represent it
will enable enormous potential of the
Commonwealth 1.4 billion young people to
transform our world for the better
in the same way boxing gave me the
opportunity and framework to become
Olympic champion Commonwealth champion
and now it's a heavyweight champion of
the world but I ask myself what does the
Commonwealth really mean the second part
of that word is key for me
a United common future could create
opportunities for our Commonwealth
cousins whether they're growing up in
Nigeria Australia Bangladesh or Jamaica
or right here in Britain so here's two
fish and chips and a Gucci suit and
pounded Jam to the UK and Nigeria and so
the children of the Commonwealth thank
you very much for listening and now
James O'Donnell organist and master of
the choristers directs britain anthem
will be joyful in the Lord all ye lands
[Applause]
[Music]
the Prime Minister wanting to justify
himself the lawyer asked Jesus and who
is my neighbor
jesus replied a man was going down from
Jerusalem to Jericho and fell into the
hands of robbers who stripped him beat
him and went away leaving him half dead
now by chance a priest was going down
that road and when he saw him he passed
by on the other side so likewise a
Levite when he came to the place and saw
him passed by on the other side but a
Samaritan while traveling came near him
and when he saw him he was moved with
pity he went to him and bandaged his
wounds having poured oil and wine on
them then he put him on his own animal
brought him to an inn and took care of
him the next day he took out two denarii
he gave them to the innkeeper and said
take care of him and when I come back I
will repay you what ever more you spend
which of these three do you think was a
neighbor to the man who fell into the
hands of the robbers he said the one who
showed him mercy jesus said to him go
and do likewise Boris Johnson reading
the parable of the Good Samaritan next
the rates well shame June Centennial
Mortal invisible God only wise
[Music]
extra perk YouTube star suley brakes
hello my name is su Lee brakes and I
just wanted to say it's a pleasure to be
in the presence hello my name is su Lee
brakes
I just want to say it's a pleasure to be
in the presence of so many esteemed
individuals who were United irrespective
of culture race or background by a
common theme and a common idea and I
think that I dare correct me if I'm
wrong is that we can all collectively
make the world a better place and I
think really that's all it takes
ideas and creativity because those are
what send footballs spinning into the
back of nets they send men to the moon
and women as well and they leave the
world at our fingertips so I just wanted
to share a short piece short so you can
get on to the more exciting forms of
entertainment about the power of ideas
chapter one it starts with an idea a boy
or girl in a bedroom with nothing but a
pen and a laptop chapter two that pen
has scribbled across that page numerous
times and that laptop has spent hours
illuminated in front of tired eyes in
cans of energy drink and that idea has
become a passion / obsession chapter 3
that idea turned passion / obsession has
found its way into the inbox of
like-minded individuals friends and fire
Emily signed off with the words honestly
tell me what you think you fainted this
will bang chapter 5 that idea turned
passion turn confirmation from friends
and family that is indeed a good idea
and it will actually bang has become a
project let's get to chapter 5 that
project has become viable that project
has become a reality that projects that
idea has become the potential to change
the world because as logical people we
sometimes become stuck in our ways
reluctant to change function the same
when there's nothing to gain forgetting
that all skyscrapers were once just
slabs of stone Google was once just a
scrap of codes but in this story there's
no guarantee that we'll live happily
ever after or ride off into the sunset
we don't even know for be able to afford
next month's rent but let's pick back to
chapter 1 that idea could have been the
light bulb that boy could have been
Nikola Tesla that idea could have been
freedom that girl could have been Nina
Simone cuz all it ever takes is an idea
and a lot of effort wherever it happens
in a meeting boardroom or campus dorm
room it's only ever taken one idea to
make a difference it's only ever taken
one idea to change the world thank you
guys very much
and next the faith's leaders first we're
going to hear from archbishop Nikita's
representing the greek orthodox church
[Applause]
direct our steps to fulfill your
commandments transform our hearts so
that we may experience the peace love
and unity that only comes from you break
the barriers of hatred and injustice
which shatter our society grant us faith
and love as we sojourn toward a better
future together an ex Sheikh Ibrahim
Mogra representing the Muslim community
Lord you are peace and from you is peace
you created us from a single pair and
made us into different people so that we
may know one another God enable us to
respect this diversity join together our
hearts free us from hunger disease hate
and Prejudice through your grace and
your mercy answer our prayer next the
venerable Bogota Siloam allah
representing the buddhist community
maybe all in style towards overcoming
the unwholesome state of mind it has
already Addison Mabel is tired words
preventing the unwholesome state of mind
which has knotted Arison maybe all style
towards producing a peaceful state of
mind which we have not yet experienced
maybe old style towards continuing the
peace of mind which we have already
experienced the final prayer from rabbi
Johnny Rich representing liberal Judaism
long ago the rabbi's wrote a single
human family was made at creation for
the sake of peace so we cannot say one
to another my ancestor was greater than
your ancestor the Commonwealth reflects
this in its celebration of a single
diverse family under the sovereignty of
God and let us pray that our Creator
might imbue us with the ability to see
each other through God's eyes as equals
and now James O'Donnell conducts the
Westminster Abbey choir in the anthem
angel voices ever singing music by Bob
Joe words by Francis Pot
[Music]
[Applause]
now the cosmati pavement was laid in
1268 on the orders of Henry the 3rd it
is one of the crowning jewels of
Westminster Abbey and this afternoon it
becomes a stage for Craig David who's
going to sing unbelievable
[Music]
always said I would know where to find
love
always thought I'd be ready and strong
and now somehow I just felt I could give
her
[Music]
and you came and you change my whole
world now I'm somewhere I never thought
I'd be yeah see means it's unbelievable
and I don't let it go
[Music]
Sun is so beautiful
flowing
[Music]
feel like you've always been forever a
part of me and it's unbelievable to
finally be somewhere I'd ever thought
I'd be in my head in my heart it's so
clear now hold my hand you've got
nothing to fear now I was lost and
you're asking me some
[Music]
I'm in love I'm in love you complete me
I'm somewhere I never thought I'd be now
[Music]
believable
and I don't let it go
Sun is so beautiful
flowing down
[Music]
forever part of me
and it's unbelievable
to finally be somewhere I never thought
I'd be
[Music]
when I think I heard and it's chance I
need know I can help break down
[Music]
it's unbelievable
and I don't let it go sign is so
beautiful
Flo in town
you've always been forever part of me
and it's unbelievable
[Music]
somewhere I never thought I'd be now
to the great west door of the abbey next
where we find the melodeon Steel
Orchestra with especially created
Commonwealth melody
[Music]
next Baroness Scotland Secretary General
of the Commonwealth at the great topics
let us now stand to pledge ourselves
afresh to uphold and serve the values
and fellowship of the Commonwealth we
affirm that every person possesses
unique Worth and dignity we affirm our
respect for nature and that we will be
stewards of the earth by caring for
every part of it and for it as a whole
we affirm our belief in justice for
everyone and peace among peoples and
nations joining together in kinship and
affinity in diversity and unity as
members of a worldwide family of Nations
we build on shared inheritances we
cooperate with mutual respect and
goodwill to deliver a common future for
the good of all through Commonwealth
Connection we learn from one another and
innovate to transform our communities
our nations and our world we but affirm
our belief in the Commonwealth as a
powerful influence for good
and pledge ourselves to its service now
and for the future
the final hymn in this Commonwealth day
service Charles Wesley's great love
divine all loves excelling
[Music]
[Applause]
God grants to the living grace to the
departed rest to the church the Queen
the Commonwealth and all people peace
and Concord and to our sinners life
everlasting and the blessing of God
Almighty the Father the Son and the Holy
Spirit be among you and remain with you
always the new dean of Westminster the
very Reverend dr. David Hoyle giving the
blessing which marks the end of today's
service of celebration for the
Commonwealth Dean appointed 39th Dean of
Westminster in November last year prior
to that he was Dean of Bristol today
overseeing his first major state event
one of a regular calendar of great
events that take place here at
Westminster Abbey a royal peculiar under
the direct control of the Queen the Dean
responsible to the sovereign alone
Wow and clergy progressed s-- out
towards the west door 30 boys in the
choir all of whom attend the ambient
residential choir school 12 professional
adult singers their main focus to sing
the daily choral services in the Abbey a
tradition which stretches back more than
600 years James O'Donnell organist and
master of the choristers listening now
to sub organist Peter holder
the Commonwealth Mase Darien Marine from
Trinidad and Tobago holding the mace is
the current chair of the youth-led
international task force for the
Commonwealth Youth Forum to be held in
Rwanda and in front of him the
Commonwealth flag Ellucian I had a edgy
from Nigeria carrying that Commonwealth
flag Prince Charles and the Duchess of
Cornwall Duchess of Cambridge and the
Duke and Duchess of Sussex as we've
heard this afternoon this the last time
they will appear in public before
stepping back as senior members at the
royal family Allen Countess of Wessex
spring and the back of the royal party
the clergy there the mace mace a gift of
the royal anniversary trust to the Queen
and her role as head of the Commonwealth
for the 40th anniversary of her
accession to the throne
[Music]
it's made of gold and silver covered in
little studs with the flags of each
country of the Commonwealth 53 countries
I think represented on the mace now 54
Commonwealth members after the
reintroduction of the Maldives to the
Commonwealth Valley just over a month
ago
[Music]
while Robert Hartman has been with me
this afternoon here in Westminster Abbey
so many things to reflect on from
watching this service first of all as we
look at the all the main players in the
royal family led by Her Majesty the
Queen and all of them playing some role
in the Commonwealth all I threw say
Petro all have a long lifelong
connection with this organization but
none more so than the Queen herself she
gets to thank the clergy for their role
in a service that as we discussed
earlier she very much helped to create
herself reverend christopher adults
their minor cannon a presenter leaving
westminster abbey but he's been very
much involved on a day-to-day basis in
organising this service reverend mark
birch mana cannon and Sechrist and the
reverend jennifer peterson and chaplain
here at Westminster Abbey and the dean
the new dean is is going to have to get
used to major events like this here in
this Abbey Church this royal peculiar
this National Church yes as dean you
really do find yourself at the heart of
the other national story the other can
president of the royal commonwealth
society i mean this this is somewhere
that this is rather quite aside from
from coronations the monarch is so often
here for services and national
Thanksgiving we've got VE Day coming up
in May the Queen Pacific marking that
here we see coming up behind all the
other members the royal family the
Prince of Wales there and namaste as he
says avoiding a handshake he's of course
next week he'll be off to the
Commonwealth himself he's paying a visit
to Cyprus last year he visited 20
Commonwealth countries and one year
alone there'll be more of the same this
year just behind him the Duchess of
Cornwall of course who presides over the
Commonwealth essay prize the oldest
writing competition in the world so all
these threads coming together in front
of our eyes we just saw there the Queen
greeting Alexandra Burke who entertained
us this afternoon Craig David and
tearing at the end of the line
championship boxer Anthony Joshua who I
think spoke so interestingly about the
Commonwealth and about his role as
someone who has a foot in two camps both
British and Nigerian and how that is an
experience for so many people within
this Commonwealth of Nations I thought
it was a wonderful speech as he said
earlier he was a bit nervous about it
but I think he just captured the essence
of the Commonwealth they don't where two
ways of seeing life I think that's so
important
Queen clearly delighted to meet him she
comes out through the Great West door
onto the steps outside the Abbey
thousands of people watching you can't
see them they're behind barriers on the
other side of the road but many people
turning out to support this event as
she's presented by posies we hear the
bells of Westminster Abbey ring and I
think his second Robert just to reflect
on how important the Commonwealth has
been to the Queen throughout her reign
there have been plenty of an occasion
when she's sided with the Commonwealth
over the advice of her own British
government Minister exactly she's she's
that she's nursed it really through its
infancy when she came to the throne
there were just eight members of the
Commonwealth today 54 and the Bamby many
bumps along the road and there have been
moments where the organisation has found
itself at odds sometimes with splitting
in half sometimes just trying to find
its feet and the Queen's always been
there in the early days of of more breh
house being the seat of the secretary
general it was the
the Queen you handed over one of the
family homes to this organization it
remains at the heart of royal life and
there is no doubt that the Commonwealth
benefits enormously from the Stardust
that Her Majesty the Queen and other
members of the royal family
sprinkle upon it it might not even exist
if it wasn't for this direct royal
support it has been said in in recent
years as the coal moth has receded it
was it was we have to accept it's not
the power at once wards but it is having
members the royal family like that
Cambridgeshire and the Duchess it's
having that royal Stardust as you say
patrol that just gives it that little
bit it's a unique organization and in a
world of of so many organized
multinational organizations whether it's
the g7 or the EU or a tech or OPEC or
whatever you want
the Commonwealth has does have something
unique about it we get a flavor today it
operates in a unique space and it does
have at the heart of it the Queen there
the the head of the Commonwealth who has
known all its leaders hundreds of
leaders now over nearly 70 years as head
Prince Charles behind the Queen who will
take over as head of the Commonwealth
and clearly shares many of the views and
concerns that Commonwealth countries
face every day many issues particularly
around the environment are very dear to
him and are a matter of life and death
that some Commonwealth nations they are
and over the years the Commonwealth has
found itself at loggerheads over lots of
issues it could flow it can argue over
the tiniest things but it was absolutely
unanimous from 2018 that the Prince of
Wales would be the next head of the
Commonwealth it's not automatic it's not
a hereditary title but they wanted him
and they know all these nations know how
clear how close the environment is to
his heart Queen gets into her car to
return to Buckingham Palace other
members of the royal family
all evening go to a reception to
celebrate the work of the Commonwealth
as the Duke of Cambridge in conversation
with Anthony Joshua you can see during
intended Joshua's speech a reflection of
of what he was saying amongst the
younger members of the royal family and
the duke and duchess of sussex now are
we ever going to see them again in a
situation quite like this Robert we've
talked a lot this afternoon about how
this is their last public engagement
before they they step down step back as
senior members of the royal family and
how are we going to see them next well
it's certainly the longest time for a
considerable time I expect that we'll
see them at this sort of event where the
protocol is running everything there we
see that the Queen has to leave first
and the Prince of Wales visa first as a
pecking order for everything you
literally fall into line now that's the
world they're moving away from they're
not leaving the royal family then
certainly not leaving the Commonwealth
fair Prince Harry he's going to be
talking to lots of the people here in
the Abbey today just in a different
guise in future it's not going to be as
his royal highness it's not going to be
at these state occasions no fist-pumping
they're great David yes certainly he's
got one step step beyond the the
official guidance sir but then that's
that's Prince Harry and and it is of
course a sad moment I think there were
moments during that service where you
could see he was looking pensive he was
looking studious this is all he's known
this is a world that he's been raised on
and it is going to be a shift when at
the end of the month they move into this
different phase of their life they must
have been in some ways an anxious day as
we said right at the beginning the first
time that the the whole royal family
have been together since the
announcement about the princes change of
situation was made to be there with with
your siblings with your father and with
your grandmother that must have been
quite a tricky thing well it's the first
time in public but of course in private
they have been
talking to each other and I think it
underlines the fact that you moves at
two levels you've got that the personal
and the institution and here on show
we've got them as a working family in
public but you know the family bonds are
still where they do you can go to the
cambridge of course they have to leave
ahead of the new conductors of sausage
that's just the way it goes as it's it's
it's it's a pecking order and that's one
thing that that won't change Prince
Harry remains six and nine to the throne
but this sort of protocol is sort of
waiting while one cargos having to wait
for the next one that's going to be a
way of life that's that's simply gonna
move on for them now but he will be back
I mean you know next month hopefully
depending on travel plans but hopefully
at the moment the Duke of Sussex there
he's due back in London to mark the
start of the London Marathon and we'll
just see them carrying on it at a
charitable level but not at this sort of
formal level we've talked about fifty
four members of the Commonwealth now
it's that it or do you think it's gonna
grow further well there's always a
there's always a queue and there the
Duke of Sussex himself when he was in
South Africa in southern Africa on his
tour last at the end of last year he
dropped in on Angola now behind the
scenes they're the were discussions
Angola never part of the British Empire
never never a country that doesn't speak
English but there again another country
that's seen what the Commonwealth can do
for that part of the world they're in
the queue to join and Prince Harry will
have played his part in that and Boris
Johnson the Prime Minister with Kerry
Simmons his newly announced field say
and he is someone who is clearly going
to to work towards building a great
relationship between London and the
Commonwealth hasn't always been the case
with with recent prime minister's
medical no it's certainly John Major was
was very very Pro Commonwealth having
lived in the Commonwealth Sussex
congratulating Anthony Joshua on his
speech but in the in the Tony Blair
years that was a drop off no question
the Foreign Office moved its focused
completely I think sometimes forgot what
the see in FCO stood for but it's gone
back to being the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office now
I think that one of the things that
struck me most of all about today has
been the sheer number of young people
involved I mean most of the performers
are a pretty young but watching the
children school children Scouts Girl
Guides etc taking part in this
Commonwealth Service as Anthony Joshua
said in his speech if you can enable the
untapped and enormous potential of the
Commonwealth 1.4 billion young people
you can transform our world for the
better that sums it up doesn't it it
does and and as that you can don't just
leave you know they they in many ways
the organization they represent know the
Queen's Commonwealth trust they still
president vice president of that that
that's all about young people as is
indeed the Commonwealth Games the next
big Commonwealth event coming to Britain
and I suspect we will see both of them
turning up for it in 2022 in Birmingham
is the next Commonwealth Games and the
Commonwealth Games come around the
Olympics they run two years between each
Olympic Games of course they're not as
big but they're massively significant to
city I remember going to the
Commonwealth Games when they were in
Manchester amazing major event as will
be in Birmingham in two years to have
indeed and and rather like the Invictus
games that the new go Sussex will be
attending in in the hey in in May they
they are not like the Olympics and the
Commonwealth Games often called the
friendly games because there is just
that added dimension of these shared
links and now this I think this is a
moving and very significant moment I
think this is a moment you'll see on a
lot of front pages tomorrow as the as
the couple as they they're not just
saying farewell to these young people on
the steps by the great way store but
this is
certainly au revoir if not a deer I
think it's a revoir to a way of life
that they will no longer be part of it
certainly for the foreseeable future but
not an era where entirely to the
Commonwealth just this morning the
Duchess of Sussex was meeting with the
Commonwealth universities yes
Association of which she is very
involved which brings together hundreds
of universities across the Commonwealth
and helps them work together help some
exchange learning information and and
staff exactly more than 500 universities
the oldest university network in the
world came back to 1913 and the Duchess
remains very much an active patron of
that in the same way that Duke himself
is involved with so many other
Commonwealth charities that as its gonna
change this is the moment isn't it
they're out of the Abbey out of the
fence that surrounds the a be saying
goodbye to those who have run today's
service as they prepare to get into the
car that will whisk them away from the
Abbey whisked them away from this great
public event this afternoon and whisked
them away from public life or at least
from formal royal from formal royal
public life
they are next time we see them it will
be more a case of corny Harry and I'll
still retain the HRH but they won't be
using it they are effectively heading
off to in slightly uncharted waters
territory that the members the royal
family haven't been to before the Queen
wants to make it as give it give it the
best possible chance but there is 12
months review just so that we can see
how it pans out meanwhile this is the
traditional face of royalty the darlin
countess of wessex Doon what Royals have
done over the centuries and will
continue to do and with very passionate
and specialists interest the Countess of
Wessex particular interests we've been
hearing in in issues around sites across
the Commonwealth
Robert Harbin thank you very much Thank
You Dean Ron for joining us here at
Westminster Abbey this afternoon the end
of this great celebration painting such
a vivid picture of the Commonwealth and
its 54 members
two point four billion people countries
large and small rich and poor countries
working together to address issues
relating to health politics and the
environment all of them responding to
the head of the Commonwealth Her Majesty
the Queen whose service this has been
this afternoon from all of us here at
Westminster Abbey a very good afternoon
[Music]